This directory contains world definitions, each in its own
subdirectory.  Normally, the following worlds will already be
defined:

  micro-exec

    This world is for use with the "micro-exec" execution agent that's
    built into the O-Plan planner.  It's generic in that it can handle
    plans for any domain, and it allows the user to determine the fate
    of actions in the plan and to schedule "unexpected" events; however,
    its simulation abilities are minimal.

  pacifica

    This world provides a simulator for evacuation operations on the
    island of Pacifica.  See the WorldSim documentation for the details.

To define a new world W:

1. Make a subdirectory called W.  It will contain the files that
   define the world.

2. Make a file called W/W-world.lsp.  This file will be loaded at
   run-time by the world simulator when the simulator is told to use 
   world W, and W/W-world should arrange for loading any other files
   that need to be loaded.  The current working directory will be the
   W subdirectory during the load process, so that file names relative
   to W can be used.

   If a compiled version of W/W-world.lsp exists, then it will be
   loaded instead, but only if it is newer than the source file.

   Typical contents for a W/W-world.lsp file are as follows, with
   "W" replaced by the actual name used:

      (in-package :world)

      (load "W-system")

      (load-system 'W-world)

3. Make a file called W/W-system.lsp.  It must contain a system 
   definition for a system called W-world.  To see how to define
   systems, read the documentation in the file source/support/
   defsys.lsp and look at existing world definitions as examples.
   The base directory will be the W subdirectory when the system
   definition is processed, so that file names relative to W
   can be used.

The Makefile in the WorldSim source directory can be used to compile
all "known worlds", i.e. all worlds that have a subdirectory in this
directory and a W-system.lsp file.

